Welcome, everybody. We've got an exciting webinar for you today featuring Regeneron
x Atorus and the work that we've been doing together with those two teams. I'm going to
be your host, Phil Bauscher. I'm going to kick things off today and then I'll also help
with the Q&A at the end of the webinar. So if you have any questions throughout the webinar,
feel free to post those in the chat. And then during the Q&A, we'll get to those questions
as a group. I've got some really awesome webinar hosts that are going to take you through the
presentations today. First, we've got Sri Krishna Murthy, the Director of Product Management
Global IT at Regeneron. We've also got Ryan Hu, the Associate Director of Stats Programming.
And then we've got Maya Gaines, Associate Director at Atorus. And we've got Michael
Stackhouse, CIO of Atorus as well. And so we're really excited to highlight Regeneron
today. They have been such a big user of open source across so many different areas of the
company, drug discovery, PKPD, even people ops, and now bridging into clinical reporting.
Today we're going to talk about the fragmented legacy environment and how they were able
to unify that into a connected ecosystem using open source and Shiny to move from static
reporting to dynamic, scalable, and real-time data science and highlight how they partnered
with Atorus to do a lot of that work. So we're going to pass things over now to Sri to kick
off the webinar.
Thank you so much, Phil. And good afternoon, everyone. My name is Sri Krishna Murthy. I'm
Director of Global Development IT within Regeneron. So very excited to be in this webinar.
And in this webinar, we'll be talking about how at Regeneron, we have created a compliant
platform that supports multilingual analytics. And then we have multiple groups within global
development at Regeneron using this platform in order to rapidly build standardized, reusable,
and scalable R-Shiny applications. And that supports clinical review.
So this is the quick outline of what we are going to be speaking about. So initially,
we'll be talking about how we created the platform itself. And then we'll be going into
how the R-Shiny app was created and what are some of the best design patterns to make things
standardized and reusable.
All right. So let's start at the beginning. Maybe we go back a couple of years back into
2023 and talk about why we needed to build this and what is the problem statement. One
of the things which was mentioned by our user community was that we are big users of
SAS like any other life sciences company because SAS is used typically to submit to the FDA.
And one of the things which the users expressed interest in was that they wanted to do more
work using open source programming, use a programming languages such as R and Python.
And even though they were using it, but it was all done through laptops. So there was
a desire to have some sort of centralized way of using open source programming in addition
to SAS. Also, they had a requirement that they needed to have some collaboration between
the various platforms which were there at Regenton. For example, we had SAS 9.4 on prem.
And then we had R and Python, which was used in the laptops. But there was limited collaboration
between all these environments because of the fragmented nature of the workspace. So
they wanted more collaboration. And lack of collaboration meant that the same artifact
would be regenerated over and over again. So they wanted to have better ways of working
with each other. And then anything which would be created could be reused. Apart from that,
one other thing was that our SAS environment itself was nearing end of life or nearing
end of feature complete. And we needed to modernize or refresh it. And apart from that,
we also had the issue that there were certain areas where the performance was low and it
was not scalable. So all these were the problem statements we wanted to attack. Next slide,
please. So based on this problem statement, we defined our goal. Our goal was essentially
to build a scalable, multilingual, multi-source computing and analytics platform across the
enterprise. So let me go into some details on what exactly we mean by this. Maybe if you can
go back to the previous slide, Maya. By scalable, what we mean is that the platform which we built
should be able to scale as we have a greater amount of data coming and we have a greater
number of studies. It should be multilingual in the sense that it should be able to support
languages such as SAS. It should also be able to support languages such as R, Python, Scala,
to name a few. And it should be multi-source. That means it should be able to support a
proprietary platform such as SAS along with like an open source platform such as POSIT.
So all these things should go together and people should be able to seamlessly
flow from one environment to another and then conduct their analytics. So that was our goal.
Next slide, please. So let's start with a roadmap, right, on how we started with 2023,
where we are at present, and then what is our plan for going forward. So if you look at 2023,
as I mentioned earlier, what we had was legacy SAS 9.4, which was a GXP system, and that was
on-prem, that was on-prem software which was installed. And the storage was Isilon,
and Isilon was also on-prem. As far as the non-GXP use cases was concerned, we had SAS
Studio 9.4, and that was installed on AWS. So that was what was the environment. As you can see
from this diagram, we really did not have any open source environment as such, but people did use R
and other Python and things like that on their laptops. Moving on to 2024, what we did was we
rolled out our open source global environment platform, which was the POSIT platform, and we
branded that as RSGD, which stands for RStudio Global Development Environment.
And that gained a lot of traction, popularity, and multiple groups started using that to do
open source development. And then we moved on to 2025. And in 2024 itself, we started planning on
how we would migrate SAS as well and build a consolidated ecosystem. So in 2025, what we did
is we upgraded the RSGD platform to OSGD. We rebranded that as OSGD to give that a flavor of
open source, not just R. And that was also sort of parallel to what POSIT did by calling RStudio
as POSIT. So we wanted to give that open source flavor. So we upgraded that to OSGD, and we also
moved the operating system from RHEL 7, which was sort of outdated, to RHEL 9 so that it had the
most modern operating system. And then we also introduced a lot of new features related to
security and scaling. And in addition to that, we also started a major migration to SAS Viya.
So right now, at this point of time, we have moved SAS Grid to SAS Viya for the non-GXP
environment that is already live. And the migration of the studies is done as well.
And come November, we should be able to go live with GXP SAS Viya as well. So we have done a lot
of things this year. We have scaled out our open source environment, POSIT environment. We also
went live with SAS Viya GXP and non-GXP environment. And in addition to that, we also
installed a few environments which are able to handle big data. For example, we started using
Databricks as the backend to handle big data use cases. And one important thing, if you see
the center, you can see shared storage. So we established Isilon 1FS as the shared storage
between SAS Viya and the POSIT platform. So now going into 2026, I would say that 2025 is really
the foundational year. And then 2026 will be the year of consolidation, where we are going to be
truly unifying all these different platforms. We are also going to be pushing all the high
performance use cases to either Databricks or to RWS clusters. And then we'll be having a clear
segregation between GXP and non-GXP use cases. And then many of these platforms, including POSIT,
will also become GXP at this stage. And then, of course, we'll also be introducing new GenAI,
AI use cases, integrating with Copilot and other LLPs. And then finally, we'll also be
enabling multi-level security so that we can have fine-grained security at folder level,
subfolder level, as well as row and data column levels as well. So that is our overall roadmap.
And what you can see is we started small, and then we incrementally built this product.
And then by 2026, we should have a fully built unified. Next slide, please.
So let's look at some of the technical highlights. Some of the things we enabled was,
as I mentioned earlier, we enabled a unified storage, which uses 1FS Isilon. There are a few
alternatives to that, which we can go into that later. But we use 1FS Isilon on AWS to support
dual mounting across Windows and Linux, which connects to both the POSIT platform as well as
SAS. And then we are also GXP ready, or we'll be GXP ready, so that it can support both
exploratory as well as primary endpoints. This is an important one because we don't want to do
stuff on Windows anymore. So we want to do everything from a centralized area. So all the
work now is being done either on SAS on cloud, or it is being done on POSIT platform. So no work
gets done on the laptops any longer. As I mentioned earlier, we have enabled parallel
computing. So this is really the back end. So if you want to do any parallel computing,
then we have dedicated AWS clusters where the computing gets pushed either from SAS or from
POSIT. We also have harmonized directory structures. And this is one of the important
points of collaboration, so that you have a harmonized directory structure, whether you
work from SAS or you work from POSIT. And then, as I mentioned earlier, it is big data ready,
because if you have petabytes of data or terabytes of data, billions of rows of data,
then that computation can be pushed into Databricks, and we can enable those use cases.
And this is particularly helpful for some of our user community, which includes HVOR,
high economic outcome results, or the PPT. And finally, as I mentioned earlier, security and
access is a big part of it. So we support access management, blinding and unblinding,
which is very important for pharma use cases through this mechanism. So the pie chart on the
side already includes many of the things I've spoken about earlier. We have multi-language
support, SAS, R, Python. We have shared security storage across GXP and non-GXP use cases.
We also have parallel computing, big data processing. And then we also have a product
centric delivery model using DevOps. And then finally, let's look at some of the value delivered.
So I'll go quickly through that. Using this new platform, we have 80% faster queries on large
datasets. We have 30 minutes of productivity gain per dataset because of the shared file system
across the different platforms. At this point of time, it's highly popular, and it is a go-to
platform for doing any kind of iShiny development. We have almost 11 departments within global
development itself using this platform, and we have 500 plus users and growing. And all these
are GXP plus non-GXP use cases. So at this point of time, I would like to hand it over to my
co-worker, Ryan Yu, who is going to be talking about how his group, which is statistical
programming, uses this platform to create cutting-edge iShiny apps. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Sri. So at Resonator, in our statistical programming group,
we have three technology regions, and they are real-time, dynamic, and scalable.
And we think our iShiny is one of the critical components to help us achieve the visions.
And our approach to developing iShiny apps is through rPackage. And this slide shows
our rPackage design principle, and they are standard addition, flexibility, and easy to use.
For the standard addition part, we mean each rPackage input standard is a little like
building blocks, which covers different data analysis. And while maintaining a standard
addition, we also allow customization, because that's the nature of a clinical trial analysis.
I mean, different study teams always have different requirements, right?
So to make our iShiny apps development simpler for programmers with limited R knowledge,
we introduced a metafile system. So the system allows them to create a study-level application
with minimal coding efforts. So I'd like to show a case study. This is an iShiny app focused on
adverse events monitoring in clinical trials. So it's mainly used by safety scientists.
In this slide, the next few slides, I'm going to highlight some key features from the app.
So from the top of this screenshot, you see different types. So they are for different
data analysis. And we also have global filters panel on the left side. And we have an output
panel on the right side. So in this page, on the top, we have a local filter, which only applies
to this page. Down below, we have this waterfall plot, which is like a count of the percentage of
patients by the system. And the bars are interactive. And next, if you hover on it,
you will see the count of patients who had adverse events in that category. And it also
shows the population at the denominator and the corresponding percentage. Next, the other,
sorry, can you go back, Maya? So the other key feature I want to talk about is upper right,
there's a downloading feature. Because the data in this app keeps refreshing over the time.
And if the end users want to keep a record, a static report of the current data version,
then they can use this downloading feature. And then when they click the button, next,
it will download like a R markdown file in HTML format. And this markdown reserves
interaction features such as a tooltip from the app. So another page from the same app
is an AE timeline. So this is a visualization of all the adverse events by patients.
So from the X axis, there's a study date. So we can see the, for each line is an adverse event.
So we can see the position, like we can tell roughly when the event has started and when
the event stopped. Next, now if we only focus on one patient, so you can tell this patient
had four events, right? And it's color-coded based on their severity. Next. So we can tell
this patient had three mild events and one moderate. And each lines are also interactive.
Yeah, from here, we can see the name of the preferred term, the start date, stop date,
and also the duration. And if you want to learn more information about adverse events, you can
click the line. Next. And it will show a pop-up window which includes all the adverse events for
that patient. And in this window, you can see more columns, right? Like others, severity, causality,
and so on. Okay, next. So here's another example from the app. So this table is a typical summary
table by some kind of PT. And on the left side, if we choose a series of events only,
then the table will be rendered to only including series events. And the entire table are also
interactive. If we click the number two in the red box, it will have a pop-up window to show which
patient ID contributed to the summary count. So this feature builds the link between summary report
and the patient-level data, which makes the data review super efficient. So another feature I want
to highlight here is SMQ. So all the SMQs that are relevant to the study data are built into the
app. So in this example, if I choose acute pancreatitis, and for the type, I choose broad
plus narrow. At the same table, as we see previously, the summary by some PT will be
rendered to only include the adverse events which belong to the acute pancreatitis. All right, so
based on what we learned, I also like to share some tips about how to make successful Shiny apps.
So first, we need to build powerful functionalities. We need to talk to our stakeholders,
understand their requirements. For example, we can input a subgroup analysis. We can input
different statistical models for efficacy analysis for them to choose. And we can also give them
options to explore relationship between different parameters. And the second,
user interface is important. Because appealing user interface will always help end users to
adopt the new tool quickly. And we also care about user experience, of course. For example,
we require like any response time to be like one second or less for any calculation at the
rendering. We also need to provide the proper trainings and the guidelines to the end users
so they can get familiar with the app and they are able to leverage all the functionality and
the power and help their review more efficiently. Lastly, we also care about user feedback.
So on the right side, we designed this within app feature feedback collection panel. So in this
small panel, they can read their experience. And they can also enter comments and questions.
After submission, it will trigger email. So many of our relevant team member will receive the email
and then respond accordingly. Okay, so that's the end of my part. I'll pass to Maya. Thank you.
Thanks, Ryan. So as Ryan went over this case study, we can use that and extrapolate it here
for what we've done at Regeneron. So it's common practice, right, that we make a Shiny application
for a specific study with specific endpoints in mind. And then once we're done with that,
we want to reuse what we've just created for another study. So in this imagery here, we can
lift and shift that by copying and pasting essentially all the code that was in that
repository. What happens now if you find a bug in that second study? Then you have to copy and paste
that code back into the other repository. What about a feature? Ryan showed a AE timeline, but
maybe there's another graphic that you want specific to this second study. How am I going to
back add that to the first study? And similarly, let's extrapolate that even
farther to your entire portfolio of studies. How am I going to take that feature and now copy and
paste it into a bunch of different repositories with different study data? That seems onerous
and a little cumbersome. So what we have done here is create a layer of abstraction. We created a
package that is essentially a suite of features and functions to create this Shiny app that you
can configure for all of your studies. Now if you find a bug in study C, we can replace that code or
we can replace that code in the package and then update your child repositories.
Similarly, you can turn on and off different features within your child repositories. Maybe
there's a bespoke chart that applies to a really rare disease that doesn't apply to another
study. You could turn those on or off very easily. Let's get nerdy and talk about implementation
here. How did we do this? So each study is now going to have the Shiny code that calls that
parent package. At Regeneron, we call the package the AE package and then within that package you
have a function called create app. So I'm going to create a blank slate repository and it's going
to have these three files within it. One is my app.R with the create app that calls the create
app function of our custom suite of functionality. Another file is an R markdown script. This can be
any R file, can be a Cordo document. Why we chose this is because this is the data preparation
file that calls the specific data for this specific study and each application requires
the data to be in a rigid format. So we do all of our data manipulation ETL on this in this file
that we also host on Connect. We host this file on Connect because Connect makes it really easy
to schedule a job to rerun this file at some cadence. So whenever this study's data is updated,
this file will rerun and that output of the file is used as the input for the Shiny app. Lastly,
Ryan touched upon, we have a YAML file which is essentially a file configuration file. So
this framework, it calls variable names instead of relying on static column names because those
can change across studies. So this configuration file shows us what to map to which variable for
that specific study. Using this paradigm, we can now create these three file systems for each of
our studies across Connect, across our entire portfolio of studies. This process has allowed us
to optimize a Shiny framework for performance, security, and maintainability. Thinking about
your application at first with your end users, you know, from a POC with a single study is a great
thing to do. But eventually, the goal here wasn't just to build an app, it was to build a foundation.
So that is what we've done here. We've also included a verified handoff here. So the code
is fully documented, we have infrastructure notes, and this allows the study programmers
to configure these applications quite easily. We also have knowledge transfer sections
with these statistical programmers who are running the create app function
and provide those training materials as mentioned. So we follow for this process,
and as Ryan showed that feedback cycle, we follow a defined software development life cycle
with this application to keep releases consistent and manageable. Each cycle is a three-week
development cycle with one week of UAT where we're testing new features out on those child
suite of applications to make sure we've accounted for backwards compatibility and the features are
working with different data sets and different structures. Features are scoped to fit within
these cycles, which keeps our progress steady and predictable, and each release includes detailed
notes that are sent to the team covering any new functionality as well as bug fixes and how to
integrate the new version of that parent package into your old application. So downstream users can
fully adopt these new features and functionality. And lastly, this process reinforces best practices
around version control, validation, documentation, you name it, helping the application evolve safely
while remaining stable and has made this pretty easy to maintain. So as we look at the key takeaways
of this, when we started working with Regeneron, one of the critical things that we started diving
into first was building a unified environment. The dissonance between the SAS platform, having to
migrate the data out, and not having a single source of truth of the data that you were
working with and what things were being driven on is really something that causes friction, and
it makes it harder to really implement these types of applications in practice and make them
successful. So when we went about looking at Regeneron's modernization plans, what they wanted
to do with the environment, how they wanted to grow their deposit environment itself, and how it fit
into the larger GXP environment, making sure that it was unified and that everything
was talking to centralized storage, harmonizing the directory structures, harmonizing the
permissions and security model between everything was really critical to ensuring that this was
seamless as the projects grew. The core benefit of this was to make sure that when we're
deploying these applications, they can provide visibility into the ongoing
set of data that the teams are working with and able to take advantage of everything that
is coming out of the SAS platform, their centralized GXP reporting platform, and really making Shiny
provide this enhancement on top of the data that already existed there and all of the ongoing work.
So next slide, Maya. The second piece of this was to make sure that we were giving this power
to early-stage R users. When we are building up these applications, it's difficult to expect
everyone to be an expert. So with lots of ongoing trials and lots of ongoing study teams that
you can't expect all of them to have a specialist like Maya here building all of the pretty
visualizations and deploying the platform, we wanted to make sure that this was something that
we could put into the hands of more junior users and provide the power to the domain experts that
are familiar with the data at hand. We reduced the scope of what they're responsible for, but
still make sure that they can deploy and take advantage of these applications. It's something
that really gives a lot of power and a lot of autonomy down to the Regeneron team where you're
centralizing that expertise of the development back to a team that can be responsible for the
visualization and the development of everything at an advanced level. But additionally, when we look
at validation, we're centralizing where the development of the applications is actually done,
making sure that we can implement testing in a central level and then de-risking the deployment
of the deployment of these applications at the lower study level to make sure, like Maya was
pointing out, that we could fix bugs in one place and have that proliferate out to the
apps as we're deploying this. So this was a really awesome implementation where we found
that we could get a new study started up in about 30 minutes through the YAML-based configurations
and making it plug and play to the data sets where we can have a small ETL pipeline that
just focuses on getting the data ready for the application and centralizing where we configure
what parts of the app that we want ready. It makes it a lot easier to digest for those more
junior users or instead of thinking of them as junior, thinking of them as the domain specialists
rather than the R experts themselves. And then lastly, governance and support
in this shared responsibility model and having an SDLC-aligned core package, it ensures sustainable
growth in a feedback-driven release cycle. So one of the mental models that I've found for
pretty much any statistical programming group and working with – that's working on regulatory
deliverables – is the idea of a definition of a done. When you're working with applications and
these Shiny applications, you have a lot more of an ongoing cycle. Maya mentioned the software
development lifecycle. Embracing that model and understanding that you can do things iteratively,
that you can release updates, that you can gradually improve over time instead of making
sure that you have something thought of as perfection going live in the first place,
really empowers the team to start taking advantage of these benefits, gather feedback,
and continually improve as we go forth. So it's a difficult mental model for these teams to adopt
because we think of preparing our deliverable, validating it, and publishing it, and giving it
off to the ultimate stakeholders and not being done until that release is completed. By putting
together this SDLC, by getting the team on board with it, by working through and having everyone
understand that process, it's made things a lot – it's reduced a lot of friction and it's made it a
lot easier for us to continually improve and get this – these benefits into the hands of the
study teams themselves. So ultimately, what this gives us is a scalable, reproducible,
and regulated R-based data review for Regeneron. So the benefits, it's – we can really deploy
these applications out to any study that needs it. There's a simple setup process. There's a
simple mechanism to get it out there, secured, and to enable the study team to do it.
We can get from instantiation of the app to deployment within two hours. The feedback cycle
and the – or not the feedback cycle, but the build process is heavily simplified. It's really
easy, even for novice R users, to get it up and running. It enables faster decision-making for
the teams because we're giving that application out there. We can trust that it's been tested.
We can trust that the visualizations on the page are going to provide the baseline application
that we've put out there. Improving over time is a more simplistic process. It does not – it's not
rebuilding the app. It's not this heavy burden of up-versioning everything. We make our updates
and just push them, except in the new version of the app. And it's a heavily simplified process,
especially coming from the configuration-driven files, that versioning to the new version of the
app is straightforward. And it's a powerful tool to use in senior management meetings,
that visibility of giving beautiful visualizations that are helpful, informative,
and provides this feedback so much more immediately. It makes Ryan's life easier
because they can get this up and running and put it out there, and you're not sending requests back
to the stat programming team to quick push out a report and have them waiting in order to do
reporting. They have these tools at the tips of their fingers that can easily look at different
subsets of data, that can give different views into different things and answer those questions
immediately, instead of having those programmers on hand just waiting for whatever requests
going to come forth. So, what's next with this? Expanding the paradigm, reuse the SDLC
of framework for more applications. So, Ryan's team dreams big. There's a lot of potential
of the applications that they can have here. So, this model allows us to build up those
applications, get those use cases fit, and then have a model to be able to deploy out to.
Continuing to empower our developers, providing ready-to-use functions so that they can focus
on their analysis, not infrastructure. So, that's one of the things that we just want to
make sure that it's seamless for them to work on, that they don't need to think too hard
into the underlying data platform. That unified environment, making sure that we're aligning with
permissions models, we're aligning with the harmonized data structures, that we're making
sure that project to project, you can trust that those foundations are in place and that you don't
need to worry a lot about getting everything set up so that it can be deployed. Applying this to
separate departments as well. So, working with the biomarker team to apply this agile methodology
for iterative delivery across other departments, expanding it out. Sri started by talking that
there's a lot of different stakeholders who are using deposit platforms and using Shiny
and these visualizations at Regeneron. So, these are foundations that can be taken advantage of
within multiple departments, because at the end of the day, we need to align data security,
we need to align the deployment process, and make sure that these things can be seamless for
different teams. And then combine everything within the GXP environment, a much larger project,
but the entire purpose of this has been to make sure that in this next generation platform,
that everything is harmonized, that we have the compliance, validation, and scalability
across projects. And so, with that, I think we can move into the Q&A. Bill, do you want to moderate
for us? Yes, that sounds great. Thank you so much, Sri and Ryan, Maya, Mike. Fantastic webinar,
lots of great comments, a lot of great questions are coming in. I'm glad we've got about 15-20
minutes here, so I'm just going to go through the list and we'll see how far we get. If you have
questions still, feel free to post those in the chat and we can tackle those as they come in.
So, I'm just going to go with some of the ones that came in first and work my way down.
There's one question here, how did you manage GXP citizen development from a process and compliance
perspective? So, I think that was maybe one for Regeneron. Yeah. So, let's get a few things clear
here, right? So, as far as SAS is concerned, that is our GXP environment at this point of time.
And for open source, that is something we are building and that is on our roadmap for next year.
And once we implement it, that's when the citizen development will come into the picture, right? But
still, I'm going to be answering your question. So, when you talk about any environment, whether
it's Posit or any other environment, there are two parts to it. One is validating the infrastructure
itself. So, what we would do is, first of all, validate the infrastructure for Posit. Isilon is
the storage that is already validated. So, one thing is out of the way and then we'll go ahead
and then validate the Posit platform itself. Now, as far as the process is concerned, that's where
the citizen development comes in, right? So, it's not specific for Posit. It can be for anything.
But essentially, the idea here is you need to have standard operating procedures, right? And then
that is what is your validation. So, as long as you identify those SOPs, you have tested all those
things and then follow that, then basically you are GXP compliant. So, that's how you would do it.
And then in Posit, one more additional thing we have to think about is really how do you validate
the packages? And for that, I'm not going to name any vendors, but there are a couple of vendors
out there, right? With whom you can sort of work and then you can get pre-validated packages,
right? So, using all these things like validating the infrastructure or qualifying the infrastructure
and then validating your SOPs and then having pre-validated packages and probably having a
risk-based approach. So, that's how you validate the whole environment. Any other comments on this
question or we'll jump to the next one? All right. I think we have one here potentially for Maya.
What is your preferred table format package for the Shiny apps? Reactable, DT, etc.?
So, that's a great question. We actually ended up using DT in this instance because it has server-side
rendering. I think you get a lot of prettier styling with Reactable, but as Ryan mentioned,
one of our primary asks were that the end-users want to see results within a second. So, we
highly use like custom CSS on top of DT, but I think it's, you know, there's a lot of great
stuff out there. I also really love GT. There's different tools. You can make a matrix of the
cost benefits of each and I think for different use cases, sorry, this is a non-answer, but for
different use cases, you're going to want a different table package probably. Another tech
question. How is version control used within the environment? Is it for code, data, or both? And
are there GXP regulatory implications for hosting the code on a platform like GitHub? And then it
continues on. Does Isilon 1FS provide versioning features? So, maybe… Yeah. So, Ryan, why didn't you
start off and then I'll add to it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, for the code part, the reason we're using
Bitbucket, so it's a similar platform as GitHub. So, we make it mandatory for any R work like
programming and the Shiny app development. We make it mandatory to have to use the data
at Bitbucket. So, that's quite different from a SAS programming. I mean, that's a learning curve
for everybody. And for the data part, so maybe you guys chime in. Yeah. I mean, as far as I think
there is a question on the Isilon storage. So, obviously, we won't be using Isilon for
version control. It is really going to be Bitbucket. So, that's what we plan to do.
So, that is already being implemented as we speak. I know that Ryan and his team have worked on quite
a few use cases for that. And one additional thing we are doing on top of it is also enabling CICD.
So, hopefully, that will be in place for next year. Keep going here. People are trying to
understand how big is the team at Regeneron or maybe how big is the team that helps to
maintain the AE apps? Ryan or maybe... Yeah. Yeah. I'll take that one. So, that's a great
question. So, we have 14 folks on like a package development and more advanced Shiny app development.
At the same, we ask our study team to do the study-level application like AE and a few other
like SRCD and so on. So, it's more like a collaboration efforts. Another quick question.
The Shiny apps, are they available to the clients or are they mostly used internally to help
BioStats, the study teams, the programming teams? So, I don't fully understand the clients here,
but we have our internal regional stakeholders like safety scientists, medical directors,
and clinical scientists and so on. But probably, you're right. So, for now, we just use it
internally at Regeneron. We are not sharing the app with any external stakeholders.
Fantastic. There's another one here. How do you handle the validation of data manipulation done
in the markdown when it comes to GXP? Something, Maya, maybe, or Ryan?
Maya, do you want to get started or...? Yeah. I can start to feel that. I think
that's more of a Ryan question. So, the stuff that we're doing in the data preparation file
is that the application is assuming the data is in a specific structure. So, it's a singular list
object with different items in that list with specific names, but then the data can have
different column names mapping to that YAML file. So, you're structuring the data. You're not
manipulating any of the numbers. I think we also have a suite of, not I think I know, we also have
a suite of unit tested functions if we are doing any ETL to the data to ensure that those functions
are verified. I do know in pharma, validated is a special word. So, I don't want to use that
incorrectly, but I can tell you that the data that we're using is tested to be kosher. Ryan,
I'm sure you can add to that. Yeah. So, in addition to what
Maya mentioned regarding the unit testing, after the deployment, we also need to go through a
process of validation process. It's like an internal document. So, we build a bunch of
checklists and all the checklists have to be completed before the release.
Awesome. I got a question here for Sri potentially. Does Databricks provide
functionality similar to that of Spark EMR clusters for parallel computations for ETL
on the big data? Yeah, I can certainly take that question. So, if you're familiar with Databricks,
it is built on top of Apache Spark. So, that is why anything which EMR Spark clusters would have,
this has the same features as well. But then it does go beyond EMR Spark in the sense that it
is a fully automated and managed system. So, that is why things like cluster setups, scaling,
maintenance, everything can be done within a Databricks itself. So, that's why people don't
need to focus on the infrastructure. They can just focus on the data processing. So, apart from that,
Databricks has so many other features like Data Lake and then ETL. So, it really gives a good
platform to work on. But yeah, quick answer to that question. Yes, it does have what EMR Spark
does and beyond. Fantastic. I got a question for Maya, I think. They would like to know how
customizable the apps are and how do you manage like one-off demands. And then there's a second
question, I think we could connect to this. It was asking about the customization nature through
the YAML configuration. That's a great question. And we made sure to address that early. So,
we have this application framework that gives you a suite of functionality, but you're not locked
into that. The end user still has full creative freedom to access the UI and server code so that
they can add their own bespoke features for that one-off thing. And then if that becomes more than
a one-off, maybe they'll work with our team to add that as a feature to the parent app so that we can
deploy it more across applications. But by allowing for that level of... It's kind of a trade-off,
right? That we have this suite of functions that you get for free, but we also gave you the open
endedness to add your own code. That would not go in the YAML. You would have to write that R code
yourself, if that makes sense. And Maya, I think there was another question that came in that was
similar. They were asking about the underlying RMD quarto files instead of using small underlying R
packages. And then they said, is this because of the encoding of the data or to help junior R users?
Feel free to jump in, Mike and Ryan. I'm going to answer this, but I hope I'm
not off base with the question. So this file, essentially what it'll do is read it. You're
going to read the raw data, which we can have our own whole conversation that I'm sure
Sari can answer around access controls to be able to do that. And then you manipulate the data
and then you create the data as an RDS that's used inside the child application.
So I guess if the question is creating a different package that has all those data
sets in there, I think that's just another approach that could potentially work. But why
we did it as this file that's hosted on Connect is to essentially act as a cron job so that we
can rerun this file really easily. Because if you have Connect, it's like this really nice GUI
of just like rerun this file every N, whatever, every night at 3 a.m. So that's kind of why we
did it that way. But if that doesn't answer your question, I'm happy to talk offline or maybe
someone else has another answer. Yeah. Go ahead, Ryan.
Yeah, I think Maya is 100% right. So the reason we use a markdown is we can deploy the markdown
to the Party Connect as well. And from there, we can schedule like an automatic data refresh,
right? Because some of our apps are connecting to the data lake and we require like a daily
refresh. So that's the way to do that. Sorry, Mike. Please add. I was just going to echo
all of that data snapshots coming in, having that run at a set schedule so that we can ensure that
the data are up to date and that it's hands off for it. So I've got a couple of questions here
from various people about training, onboarding users, what's the training like for people with
R and Shiny, the Atoris Academy bit. Maybe Ryan and Mike, if you want to cover those,
that'd be helpful. Yeah, maybe I can get started. So our people trained traditionally on SAS
programming and for R and other open source programming, I mean, it's quite different,
right? So we already tried different approaches. We tried the Atoris Academy and we also hosted
a few internal sessions. I mean, Phil, we also invited Pazit for some workshop.
I think the bottom line, we need a lot more focus training. And after the training,
we also need people to keep using R programming. Otherwise, I mean, the efforts help a lot.
Fantastic. Got a question for Sri here. They're wondering about where the clinical data save,
the data lake, the database server. And then I get another question that said, hey, we see data
bricks in the architectural diagrams. We'd love to learn more about the role that it plays in the
ecosystem. Maybe Sri, you want to dive a little deeper there? Sounds good. So the first question
is a real good question, right? So where is the clinical data stored? Is the data lake?
And I'm sort of smiling because just before this webinar, I had exactly the same conversation.
Because depending on the person you ask, like the definition of data lake would be different. Is it
just the S3 buckets or the entire environment? What do you call it as data lake? But let me answer
this question. So as far as the clinical data within Regenron is concerned, we have all agreed
upon that Isilon would be the storage location, right? So that means everything is going to be
stored in Isilon. And that's what is going to be used by any product, whether it's Posit or SAS,
right? They're going to be using it out of that. So that is a decision we have made.
But that said, if there is a desire, you can always use like S3 bucket or Postgres tables
for that matter, or any other table for storage of the data. But in case of Regenron, it is Isilon.
And then the second question regarding Databricks, if I recollect correctly,
is where exactly it is used. The way we are really using it is as a backend in the sense that if
there is a big data use case where you want to reduce a large number of data rules, petabytes
or terabytes of data, then we use a Databricks in this particular scenario. So the way we envision
it is whether it's SAS or Posit, then it will pump all those backend queries into Databricks,
it will execute it, reduce these datasets, and then push it back to the source environments.
So that is how it's being used. Fantastic. Got a couple of questions here about the
programming teams. One in particular, they're saying, is there a dedicated team of programmers
who are working on creating the Shiny apps, or is it the same trial programmers? And then they go on
to ask, are there other tasks that you're switching from SAS to R like this? Maybe Ryan,
if you want to tackle that one? Yes, that's a good question. So we have a core team, right,
focus on more like R partition development. At the same time, we have a study team,
the training trial programmers focus on implementations. Actually, it also depends on
what kind of Shiny apps we are talking about. For the more standard AE app, I mean, usually it's
done by the study team for the implementation, but for more advanced, top-line Shiny apps,
because it includes a complicated FHC analysis with a lot of highly customization,
then that has to be done by our Shiny team. And the second question is about,
sorry, can you repeat the second question? Yeah, I think it was similar. Are there other things
like what you're doing in Shiny? Oh, yeah. So at the return, we started from R Shiny development,
but we are also evaluating using R for like a SDTM item at the TFL generation. So that's more
for regulatory submission requirements. Yeah. So, I mean, we are going to that direction.
I've got quite a few questions about validation. In particular, I think they're just trying to
understand the GXP approach, the strategy at Regeneron for the Shiny apps, and really Sri,
even for the environment that you mentioned. Maybe Ryan and Sri, if you want to just mention
a little bit more about some of the approaches or strategies that you took on the GXP side.
Sri, do you want to? Yeah, I can start that off. In fact, I think I did answer that question
earlier, but let me give a little bit more detailed response here. So right now, if you
recollect my diagram about the roadmap, currently what we have validated is really the SaaS environment
and the Posit environment will validate that or make it GXP compliant next year.
And the way we'll go about it is, I think we already have it in our plans. We'll first start
with validating the infrastructure, right? So that means the storage as well as the platform,
right? So that'll be the first step. And one of those two is already done because
Isilon is the common storage for both SaaS and Posit. And because we went live with GXP SaaS
via earlier, we have already validated Isilon, right? So the storage validation is done.
So now what we need to work on is really validating Posit as a platform, right? So that'll
be the next thing. And then the third thing, and even with that validation environment, a lot of
use cases can be taken care of. But then the third thing we have to take care after that would be
really validation of the packages, right? So we can always do it internally. We can always take
various packages. We validate it and then certify that it's done. Or the other strategy is to really
purchase validated packages from different vendors or from a vendor, right? So we purchase it and
then consider that as validated. So that would be about validated packages. And then the final thing
is really the work which is being done, right? How do people build the Arshani apps? How do we
maintain it? How do we keep audit run? So that is what is the big thing here, right? So that is
really the different SOPs or operating procedures which we have to define. And then we have to
validate everything, right? In the sense that we have to define each and every procedure and then
we have to test it out and then certify that as validated. So once we accomplish all of these
things, then we can say that the environment is truly validated.
Anything you have to add, Ryan? No, no, you covered it well.
Maybe one for Maya that kind of builds on that. Someone was asking about testing of the release
of the parent packages for the implementations of the app with a study or project. Is that something
Maya or Ryan you could cover? Yeah, I think we both kind of touched upon this. But
so we have those monthly release cadences where we scope our features to that. And in that UAT
week, we test the new functionality as well as backwards compatibility. So let me take us back
here. So every change to the application, we push those to dev. So those are reviewed like as that
singular ticket or task. And then the entire suite of features for that release are tested
with integration testing in UAT. So you have kind of a double layer of defense there. And the way
that we test that is, Ryan, correct me if I'm wrong, but with like prior studies that use
the AE application as well as the ones that are on the roadmap. And then within those studies,
when deploying a new, so when the statistical programmers run the create app function,
then they're also going to do some QC and go through that checklist that Ryan was mentioning.
So we have a lot of layers of defense here. Anything you want to add, Ryan?
No, I think Maya covers it all. Perfect, perfect. I think we got maybe one last question.
Surya, I think people are interested in, before the project got started even back,
you know, two, three years ago, the sponsorship or the spark for the modernization initiative,
you know, strategies to help with that. And then also things that maybe Regeneron did to
help encourage user adoption of that platform. Yeah, that's a really good and complex question
in the sense that any project of this magnitude, right, which is quite expensive,
has to have a very well thought of strategy, right? So it all begins with the business case.
How do we put together a compelling business case so that the stakeholders understand the value of
the project? And as part of the business case, you have to provide the justification. And then
what we also did is we provided a pretty valid, pretty solid value proposition in the sense that
through the years, what is the kind of ROI you would get out of it, right? So we want to show
that we do break even at X number of years, right? And then after that, you show like a positive ROI.
And the way you show ROI is what is the time saved? What is the efficiency gained? And even
compliance, right? That could also be an ROI. And all these things can be translated to dollar
amount. What is the cost of non-compliance, right? So you can translate all that to about
dollar amount and show the positive ROI at a certain point of time. So those things would
be what would sort of convince the sponsor to say that, yes, this project is a go ahead.
And obviously, once the project is being implemented, and I've heard many of those
questions here, right? How do you train users and things like that? That would be part of
change management. And the important thing here is not to consider that as an IT project or a
business project. And as you can see, right, like we have a diverse team. I'm from IT, Ryan is from
the business, and then we have people from vendors. So we all sort of work together and then sort of
take steps forward. And we also engage with the users in a very similar kind of way, right? In
the sense that we make sure that the users are engaged. If they are not asking questions, then
you're doing something wrong. So you need to make sure that people ask the right questions. Sometimes
there'll be concerns, so you need to answer that. And then what we did is we are frequently in touch
with the different business groups. We provide bite size information so that periodically they
know what's going on and then what are the new features we are releasing and things like that.
And they are also sort of, basically what happens is that they are all invested in this particular
change, right? And then you provide training. And one of the things you can do is before giving
access, you actually make sure that people do train and pass certain tests, right, before they
can get access. So these are some of the basic things we can do in order to encourage user
engagement. Fantastic. So I'm a bit shocked, so I think I'll ask it just because I'm interested.
You mentioned a little bit, Sri, about AI and co-pilot. Any comments there you could add,
maybe kind of going forward, Ryan, on thoughts or ideas or strategies for using Gen AI on this
open source side? Yeah, Ryan, you want to start with some of the ideas on co-pilot integration?
Maybe I can add to that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think AI will definitely help our open source
development. For example, from Posi, we have a Posi assistant, right? And we have other tools
here. We are leveraging cloud code, which is quite impressive for repository updates and
maintenance. I mean, that's the trend. For example, some of our Shiny apps, like Mike mentioned,
some apps include like millions of outputs. Now the burden is on the reviewer side.
How can they review so many outputs? And maybe we can also leverage some AI power on that.
Yeah. Fantastic. That's pretty well answered. I'll just sort of add to that that the AI use
cases are of three categories, right? One is really programming support, building programs
faster. The second one is really quality, right? Once you build certain things, how do you
check the quality, right? And the third thing is, since you have data anyway, in the data lake or
in Isilon, then can you ask the data questions, right? So the AI use cases would be one of these
three. Well, thanks so much, especially to the Taurus team, Maya and Mike. Really appreciate
awesome innovative work here. And to the Regeneron team, Sri and Ryan, thank you so much for the time
and educating the drug development community here on the open source initiatives. We'll give everyone
back their evenings, mornings, afternoons. And thank you so much for joining. Keep an eye out
for our next Posit webinar, hopefully coming up over the next month or two. If you have any further
questions, feel free to reach out to the Taurus team directly or reach out to us and we can also
help connect you. I want to put one last plug. Coming up the first week in November is going to
be the R and Pharma Conference. Mike Stackhouse will be teaching a workshop there. So if you want
to get more of the Taurus team, keep an eye out for the R and Pharma Conference coming up
in November. It's a free registration. You can find that online. And with that, we'll give everyone
back their days. Thank you so much for joining and we'll see you next time.